- It helps if you increase the font size of the axis values and labels in most figures.
- I agree with Matt: AGB is an indicator of ecosystem structure.
- Appendix: some variables are missing the units (e.g., Figure 9); for some correlations you have n < 1235.

Lines 45-47: Above (lines 36-40) you also mention vegetation types, so you might want to refer to this factor here as well.

Line 79: Did you consider replacing “resistance” by “resilience”?

Lines 89-91: You might want to introduce the concept of shifting cultivation, which is the main anthropogenic process impacting ecosystem structure and function in the African savannas. 

Lines 134-135: the FCPF also aims to deliver the REDD+ objectives (there are many others multilateral or bilateral REDD+ programmes), so you might want to remove this and keep only the generic UN REDD+ programme, which in fact is under the UNFCCC.

Line 156: MAP – spell first

Lines 161-162: Check the reference

Line 226: What do you mean by “aggregated”?

Line 245: you need to include the units for ρ, D and H.

Lines 259-261: MCD64A1 is a 500-m product (https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/products/mcd64a1v006/). Also, it is a product mapping fire scars, so I was wondering why you refer to “the number of observed fires between 2001 and 2018” – this looks more like hotspots, which is a different story.

Table 1 (and elsewhere): Have you considered replacing stems/ha by stem (or tree) density?

Section 5.3.3: I’m not familiar with SEM, but shouldn’t you also provide an indication of how valid is the model with unseen data?

Lines 370-371: Please note you used CV and not CoV above (lines 273-274) to refer to coefficient of variation.

Figure 4: the dotted and dashed arrows are not easy to distinguish.

Figure 5: Some factors have odd names, e.g., n_trees_gt10_ha_log_std. It will be much easier for the reader to have the factor names as those given in Figure 4. You should rephrase the last sentence in the caption to something like: “Path coefficients where the interval does not overlap zero are considered to be significant effects.” (the same applies in Figure 8)

7.3 final sentence is a bit confusing

at some point it would be good to cite the paper that used the same data set and SEM by Pelleter et al. 2018? Siampale is a co author

We only include fire - what about other forms of degradation? Could these plots have human disturbance?
KGD: Perhaps we could touch back to your attempts to include herbivore data, making it clear that they did not improve model at all, i.e. provided little information on above-ground biomass. Could mention human disturbance when discussing how BEFR varies with stem density, and when thinking about what drives variation in stem density.

7.4. I miss a statement on disturbance in the conclusions. We acknowledge these are disturbed systems, so what have we learned about the role of disturbance (fire) on biomass?
Conclusions section. First sentence is very vague and could be removed. The second needs a bit more explanation. Is it because the results contradict or support the correlation you mention at the very start? From the results it sounds like this is supported, so you might instead say that the bird-function relationship is found even in very disturbed condition (the first time this has been shown?)

“Finally, we found that resource availability affects biomass in southern African woodlands mainly indirectly, via its effect on species diversity.” This is an important finding! Might need contextualising, e.g. in contrast to most theories of savanna ecology [!!!] or at least suggest that the role of tree diversity may have been underplayed in theories of the determinants of savanna structure. I think there is scope to make a bigger splash here.

In the discussion you raise the issue that introducing env variables reduced the explanatory power of the diversity data - perhaps you should put some numbers here to make this point crystal clear.

Fig 5 is nice - it suggests to me that the path effects are all broadly similar for all the clusters, which I think should be the main result / first sentence for this section?

Line 245: you need to include the units for ρ, D and H.

l. 449. Please clarify and explain the 'extrapolated species richness'. You mention this variable only in passing in 5.3.1, l. 266.

Joao needs this: "JMBC was supported by the Natural Environment Research Council (Agreement PR140015 between NERC and the National Centre for Earth Observation)"

Add units to Figure 9 

257         .               soil sand content by volume (Sand g kg-1) units don’t look like volume

236 diversity —> richness, but see suggestion above

225 delete up to

For Table 1, I'd write out rather than using shortenings for the table headings, especially those without units. e.g. 'Species rich.' could easily be interpreted as being 'number of plots which have high richness!' In general I think Tables should have plenty of info in the headers etc, rather than it being in the legend so much like figures - they're a more verbose form of data anyway, so there's space to make them easy to interpret without having to read additional text 

Figure 1 - titles for each subplot are far too small. In fact that's true of quite a few figures, lots of text can be quite hard to read even at A4 size on a screen.  

Title:
The title focuses on 'biodiversity-ecosystem function'.
Perhaps this should be 'tree diversity - tree biomass’, or 'tree diversity - ecosystem structure’.  I don’t see where a function (which to me would be something like GPP) comes into the analysis. So that would need to be clarified. It’s a stretch to call biomass a function, as it is the outcome of several functions both biological (endogenous) and disturbance (exogenous), and we measure biomass as a structural variable.
KGD: A fair point. There is a trade-off here between increasing appeal of article and being 'correct'. I do note that biomass has been termed an ecosystem function in many previous studies. My inclination would be to keep title as is, but give in fairly easily if reviewers take issue. Decision will be up to John, but can you let us know if you strongly disagree about this? 

FIg. 7 - ‘availability’ 

remove “, predominantly through human actions in southern Africa,” it’s true everywhere!

74           agnostic, - add comma

81-82 - needs a rewrite. relationship … invoke

93 - McNicol 2018?

“directive of the United Nations REDD+ programme or the similar Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) (Hinsley et al., 2015).” This isn’t quite right. because of the arcane relationship between UN-REDD, FCPF and the broader REDD+ concept. Maybe just say “under international efforts to reduced deforestation and degradation (REDD+).”

191 - delete          .               as a preferred method 

p10 no need to explain standardisation. Just say you did it

356 capital S

360-366 could be in a figure on appendix - then just say it was as expected.

Fig 4 Covid or CV

456         .               our second hypothesis (H2) —> H2

Abstract
You focus on biomass provision as an outcome of biodiversity loss. But that seems backwards to me - it is the loss of woody biomass that is driving biodiversity loss, is it not? You don’t come back to this point in the discussion, just a brief note in the conclusion.
KGD: Also a good point, I think we will need to modify text here, particularly given we don't cover it much at all in discussion.

Line 79: Did you consider replacing “resistance” by “resilience”?

Line 226: What do you mean by “aggregated”?

Lines 259-261: MCD64A1 is a 500-m product (https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/products/mcd64a1v006/). Also, it is a product mapping fire scars, so I was wondering why you refer to “the number of observed fires between 2001 and 2018” – this looks more like hotspots, which is a different story.

Table 1 (and elsewhere): Have you considered replacing stems/ha by stem (or tree) density?

Lines 370-371: Please note you used CV and not CoV above (lines 273-274) to refer to coefficient of variation.

Figure 5: Some factors have odd names, e.g., n_trees_gt10_ha_log_std. It will be much easier for the reader to have the factor names as those given in Figure 4. You should rephrase the last sentence in the caption to something like: “Path coefficients where the interval does not overlap zero are considered to be significant effects.” (the same applies in Figure 8)

Figure 4: the dotted and dashed arrows are not easy to distinguish.

I miss the role of disturbance (fire) in the hypotheses you test. Your hypotheses seem to focus on productivity-diversity relations, when we suspect that disturbance interrupts these and moderates the effect of production on biomass. Perhaps you could introduce disturbance as an alternate, confounding factor? This would link to the disturbance factor in the SEM of fig 2.
KGD: Given the play it gets in the abstract, I can see how a reader would expect fire to figure into the hypotheses. The way we discuss disturbance, we might expect it to interact with the biomass-richness relationship in a similar way to stem density. As fire/disturbance increases, the strength of the BEFR would decline. However, I don't think we want to do a whole additional analysis to test this at this point, and I'm not confident the fire data are good enough to even do that. So... maybe best to follow Mat's advice here, by weaving this into hypothesis 2 in some way.

Lines 161-162: Check the reference

Line 156: MAP – spell first

Lines 134-135: the FCPF also aims to deliver the REDD+ objectives (there are many others multilateral or bilateral REDD+ programmes), so you might want to remove this and keep only the generic UN REDD+ programme, which in fact is under the UNFCCC.

Lines 45-47: Above (lines 36-40) you also mention vegetation types, so you might want to refer to this factor here as well.

Lines 89-91: You might want to introduce the concept of shifting cultivation, which is the main anthropogenic process impacting ecosystem structure and function in the African savannas. 

156 -too much detail on Sankaran paper - Caroline’s 2014 Science paper is more comprehensive

Holdo: At Dewees et al. line: "I don't know if I mentioned this in the last round, but Hubbell also argues in his Princeton Monograph on Neutral Theory that savannas do not fit his model because they experience high disturbance. Just an additional vignette to bolster the case that savannas/woodlands require a closer look  where studies of species diversity are concerned."

Re-evaluate introduction, meaning of each paragraph

li 34 - poor competitors. Not sure about the terminology here. Being disturbance resistant (persistent) or able to recolonise disturbed areas is a very competitive trait. See the Bond stuff on the “persistence niche”

48: can you add some quant details within the word count? People often only read the abstract, so if you can say e.g. doubling diversity increases biomass by x you can help convey the scale of the effects
48: can you add some quant details within the word count? People often only read the abstract, so if you can say e.g. doubling diversity increases biomass by x you can help convey the scale of the effects

6.2. You might say some more about Fig. 5. This is a complex fig but you only give a couple of sentences to it. What are the key messages? Can you simplify the figure?

* References to “biodiversity”, “richness”, “species diversity”, “diversity” etc. have been largely replaced with “tree species diversity”.
you could call this S_tree or S’_tree when it is rarefied.  I”d also suggest H_CV and D_CV

6.3 - I’m not sure about the “so what” for this, even though it is a neat analysis. This is my failing [!] but I think it needs a harder sell in the intro.

6.3 I get a bit lost here. This result is really important for H2, so I would spend some more time explaining this. What would a result that falsified H2 look like?
KGD: There is scope to expand this section to make more clear I think.

There some are elements of the discussion which seem to be missing from the results and so come as surprise, e.g. ' we found a positive effect of disturbance on species diversity,’ 

6.4.  Interesting results and the figure works well. But could you vary line thickness with size of coefficient? The indirect role of fire is unexpected and intriguing. I think fig 8 could go to supplementary information.

7.3. l. 513. Miombo biomass is dominated by a few species, so more diverse plots may have lower biomass because these dominants (Brachystegia, Julbernadia) are faring less well for some reason, e.g. selective removals of some of these large stems?

Section 5.3.3: I’m not familiar with SEM, but shouldn’t you also provide an indication of how valid is the model with unseen data?

7.1., l. 437, Is there a causation/correlation issue here? Does diversity lead to biomass or vice versa?
KGD: We have set up the models in this direction, and that is how we have built in mechanism as well (species diversity gives structural diversity gives biomass). But ultimately, this is all statistical modelling on observed data, so reverse causality or third variable effects could be at play. John, I guess we need to think about whether we want to introduce some text somewhere about this.

Section 7.2. the inverse relationship between soil fertility and AGB probably deserves its own paragraph. This is an important finding against a lot of the literature, I think you should explore this further. I'm not sure how word limited you are, but soil fertility and moisture don't make it into the Abstract, and maybe should.

Holdo: At "The direction of these correlations" paragraph: "Somewhere we need to acknowledge that the analysis ignores possible spatial autocorrelation effects. I don't know how to incorporate such effects in SEM, although I'm sure "there's an R package for that." This one seems to incorporate a distance matrix into a Lavaan model: https://rdrr.io/cran/sesem/man/runModels.html. At the least, we could report bivariate correlation strengths from gls models."
